ntroduction from the Editor
Welcome to the 2024 edition of Sagittarius! You’re in for a treat this year, as we have a
fantastic selection of articles, news, and images in this year’s edition. Learn about upcoming
telescopes, dig into the details of Newton and Einstein’s theories of gravity and marvel at
beautiful images taken by our members in the last year. There’s also lots of astronomical
events to watch out for,
As ever, I’d like to thank everyone who contributed to this newsletter and reiterate that I’m
always looking for new articles, so if you’d like to submit something for the next edition please
get in touch.
Thomas Harvey
Astronomy Section Secretaries Report 2024
Changes to the Committee
Towards the end of 2023 there were some changes to the committee. I would like to thank
our outgoing Treasurer, Steve Bougourd for his time during 2023 and welcome Stephanie
Le Tissier, whose experience in finance will benefit the Section. Jacques Loveridge, who
recently won the Sovereign Art Foundation Global Student Prize in 2023 has very kindly
agreed to be imaging officer and we look forward to expanding our knowledge of
astrophotography. I would also like to thank Allan Phillips for tirelessly maintaining our
equipment and helping members with their equipment over the last few years, and dealing
with the numerous equipment-related public enquiries; he will be taking a short break from
this role.
Members and group events for 2023
It has been a busy year for the Astronomy Section, we have had 25 members’ activities
through the year which have been well attended. In addition, we have held 22 outreach
events, many of which have been youth group visits, others have been adult groups and
seven have been ticketed Eventbrite events. In total, through our outreach, we engaged with
nearly 500 people and raised about £1,430. I would like to thank all those who have helped
with the events from the organising and timetabling, catering, lecturing and manning the
telescopes.
Maintenance
We have also been busy doing some maintenance and finishing off small jobs associated
with the new telescope building. Again, I would like to thank all those members that have
donated many hours, including cutting the grass and keeping the edges strimmered.
Unfortunately, during the recent gales we lost half the roofing felt from the telescope building
and rain found its way into the building, luckily though, no permanent damage was done to
the telescopes. I am very grateful to Festung who made some emergency repairs. However,
we will need to get the roof re-felted in the coming months. Another priority early in 2024 will
be to cut the pine trees to the south-east boundary, at a cost of £960.
3
Audio-visual upgrades
The main focus through 2023 has been to replace our aging audio-visual equipment and
associated software. Towards the end of 2022 we were very fortunate to receive a grant of
£6,086 from the Community Foundation. This has allowed us to purchase a new projector,
two desktop PC’s – one for the meeting room and one for the telescope building and one
laptop. The total cost was £6,254.76. We are also grateful to Steve Bougourd for kindly
donating a new monitor for the meeting room PC.
Other equipment purchases
Other equipment purchases include an Optolong 3nm dual band filter for the ASI533 camera
for £220.83. This will be particularly useful for outreach and will allow us to show the public
star forming regions, rich in molecular hydrogen, even under a full moon. It will also allow
members to do narrow-band and HaRGB imaging with the deep space camera. In addition,
for those interested in astrophotography we have purchased an iOptron SkyGuider Pro
package and aluminium tripod for £480, which members when trained may use with their
own camera and lenses.
Finally, we have sold the HEQ5 equatorial mount and replaced it with an iOptron GEM 45
mount which cost £1,856. The new mount will be significantly easier to set up and use with
the laptop. We are particularly looking forward to using this for upcoming outreach.
Security upgrades
The observatory site has had a complete security overhaul. The locks on the meeting room
and store room doors have been changed. Keys are restricted to committee members; and
should it be required, then others will be given access through the digital key-safe on the
meeting room wall. Periodically, for compliance with insurance requirements to maintain
security, the number will be changed and all current persons with access will be notified of
the new number. Likewise for the telescope building which is a digital lock. Members are
reminded not to give out the numbers to anyone else. The cost of the security upgrade was
£133.
Other general items
Weekly meetings – There is a calendar for 2024 which shows the dates for Tuesday
gatherings. There will be no formal meetings during the summer months, although outreach
will continue. The calendar was attached to the latest Bulletin and can also be found on our
website. If anyone would like another copy, please let me know and I will email it. Topics for
meetings will be advertised as normal through the Bulletins. On occasion, we might hold an
impromptu talk or observing. These are often announced at the last minute, so please check
your email.
Membership is now due. The rate for the Astronomy Section will remain the same at £15,
or £15.50 through the La Société Guernesiaise (LSG) website. The LSG membership
however, has risen slightly to £35 for a single and £40 for a family. You must be a member
of LSG to join the Astronomy Section. You may renew your membership through the LSG
website: https://societe.org.gg/wp/join-renew/ or by direct payment to the Section’s bank
account at: NatWest Sort Code: 60-09-20, a/c number 70602964, for a reference please
give “membership” and your name.
4
Honesty box for drinks and biscuits – there is generally milk, tea, coffee, cold drinks and
biscuits available in the kitchen. Members who make use of this are asked to put money into
the honesty box. Alternatively, you may contribute by purchasing drinks and/or biscuits for
others to share.
I wish everyone a very Happy New Year with clear skies.
Jean Dean
Upcoming Talks
Club nights start at 8pm, or 8:30 pm for new or prospective members, who are very welcome
to come along to any club nights. The first half hour is reserved for discussions on committee
matters, outreach and other logistical matters. A list of club nights for the next few months is
given below.
These talks are a mixture of live events and recordings. Generally, recordings are played on
the club projector in the meeting room for members to watch and discuss.
23rd January
Talk: How to identify bats in flight
Description: If you are up late at the observatory in the spring-summer months you might
have noticed something flying around in the darkness. We are very lucky to have bats in
the vicinity. We welcome to the observatory Laura Harrison, Secretary of the Bat Section,
who will be giving a brief talk on some of Guernsey’s bats and how to identify them.
Speaker: Laura Harrison
6th February
Talk: Von Karman Lecture: Spacecraft Assembly, Test, and Launch Operations (ATLO)
Description: What does it take to build a spacecraft? It’s up to the Spacecraft Assembly,
Test, and Launch Operations (ATLO) team to assemble it, bake it, shake it, get it to the
pad and launch it.
Speakers: Michelle Tomey Colizzi, Mechanical Engineer, NASA/JPL
Luis A Dominguez, ATLO Electrical & Dep. Systems Lead, NASA/JPLASA/JPL
20th February
Talk: Von Karman Lecture: The Universe of Very Cold: The James Webb Space
Telescope, MIRI, and the Cryocooler
5
Description: The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) takes incredible images using
infrared light. The optics and science instruments must be incredibly cold, especially
JWST’s Mid-Infrared Instrument (MIRI), which needs to be at a temperature of less than 7
kelvins, or -447 F. This is not possible without the Cryocooler, which keeps MIRI’s
detectors cool.
Speaker: Dr. Konstantin Penanen, JWST/MIRI Cryocooler Lead, NASA/JPL
5th March
Talk: Light: A User’s Manual
Description: In this talk we explain how we came to understand the nature of light. It starts
by looking at what the ancients thought about light and how we came to realise that light
has a finite speed. It looks at Newton's work in his book "Opticks" and the wave theory of
light. Then we explain how various sorts of "invisible" light came to be discovered and then
extend this idea to the whole of the electromagnetic spectrum. We look briefly at the
particle theory of light, wave-particle duality and the photoelectric effect. Then we examine
how the James Webb Space Telescope is going to revolutionise astronomy in the years to
come.
Speaker: Jason Hill
19th March
Talk: Von Karman Lecture – How do missions get formed?
Description: We’ll talk to one of our robotics engineers about project formulation and
demonstration, looking at the process of generating ideas - from napkin sketch to prototype
to development and testing. We’ll also look at how they figure out the right questions to ask
in order to understand what technologies are needed to get the job done using real life
experiences and stories about the Mars Rovers and Mars Sample Return Mission.
Speaker: Paulo Younse, Robotics Engineer, NASA/JPL
Member’s Photo Gallery
David’s Mantra
LOOK UP
LOOK HARDER
LOOK LONGER
KEEP LOOKING
David Le Conte (Courtesy of Dorothy
Le Conte)
In this section I’ve collected a few of the great
images taken by our members in 2023!
Messier 101, commonly called the Pinwheel Galaxy is a face on grand design spiral galaxy, located
21 million light-years away within the constellation of Ursa Major. The spiral disk is 170,000 light-years
across and contains around 1 trillion stars, making it about twice the size of our Milky Way galaxy.
M101 has high levels of star formation caused by gravitational interactions with neighbouring galaxies;
these regions can be seen as red speckles which are rich in hydrogen, the basic element of a star.
This Image was taken using an unmodified Sony A7iii camera attached to a Sky Watcher 250PDS
Newtonian reflecting telescope and an EQ6-R Pro equatorial mount. There is a total of 11 hours of 6
minute exposures for broadband data and 7 hours of 10 minute exposures using an Optolong L-
enhance filter to capture hydrogen regions. All the data was acquired in May of 2023.
During the process of collecting the data over multiple nights, a bright supernova SN 2023ixf (arrow),
occurred in one of the galaxy’s spiral arms. This is when a massive star runs out of fuel and
gravitational forces dominate, leading to the almost instantaneous collapse of the star (imagine
something 1 million times the mass of Earth collapsing in just 15 seconds!). SN 2023ixf was one of the
brightest supernovae visible in the last decade and was observed for several months after.
This image of the upper observation level of the Battery Dollmann command bunker at Pleinmont shows
parts of the winter Milky Way, and the constellations of Orion and Monoceros with Barnard’s loop,
Lambda Orionis ring and many deep sky objects that make up the Orion Molecular Cloud Complex: this
is one of the closest stars forming regions to Earth, as close as just 1,400 light-years away. Most of
these objects are rich in hydrogen and shown in magenta in this image. Also visible in the image is an
atmospheric phenomenon known as airglow, that takes place after atoms recombine after being ionized
and broken down by the sun and cosmic rays. Depending on the altitude and chemical element the
airglow can take on many different colours and form many different patterns.
This image is a 3-panel panorama with a single 4 minute exposure per panel taken with a Sigma 40mm
Art lens at f/2, unmodified Sony A7iii and Sky Watcher Star Adventurer. It was stitched together and
edited in Adobe Lightroom and Photoshop.
Astronomical Events 2024
Welcome to the Astronomy Sections guide for what and when to observe in 2024!
Planets
Mercury will be visible in the periods around its greatest elongations:
Date Elongation Direction Time
12 January 23.5º Western Low in East Before sunrise
24 March 18.7º Eastern Low in West After sunset
9 May 26.4º Western Low in East Before sunrise
22 July 26.9º Eastern Low in West After sunset
5 September 18.1º Western Low in East Before sunrise
16 November 22.5º Eastern Low in West Before sunset
25 December 22º. Western. Low in East Before sunrise
Jupiter will be visible in the evening throughout, January, February and March, but setting earlier as
the year progresses. Jupiter reaches opposition on December 7th, when it will be at its brightest
point of the year. Jupiter will be visible in the early morning from May, rising earlier throughout the
year. Jupiter reaches the perigee of its 12 year orbit of the Sun on December 6th, and will be optimally
placed for observation throughout the evening from September onwards.
Mars will be visible in the west in the evening until June, setting earlier throughout the year. From
early May, Venus will be visible around dusk, as the “Evening Star” in the western sky.
When Jupiter is visible, we will have good views of the four Galilean moons, atmospheric bands on
the planet’s disc, and the Great Red Spot. Transit, shadow and occultation events involving Jupiter’s
moons can be calculated using www.skyandtelescope.com/wp-content/observing-
tools/jupiter_moons/jupiter.html on the Sky & Telescope website. (They can also be found in the
2023 BAA Handbook. They can be simulated on software such as StarryNight
(http://www.starrynightstore.com/), and some of the many astronomy apps, some of which also
gives the transit times of the Great Red Spot. The Spot’s transit times are also available at
http://www.skyandtelescope.com/observing/celestial-objects-to-watch/transit-times-of-jupiters-
great-red-spot/ (again using the US date format).
Saturn reaches opposition on September 8th, when it will be at its brightest point of the year. The
rings will be almost edge-on. and its brightest moons, especially Titan, should also be visible. Saturn
will be visible in the early evening throughout January. It will be visible in the early morning from
around June, rising earlier as the year progresses and becoming an evening object by July.
Uranus will be at opposition in Taurus on November 17th. Neptune will be at opposition in Pisces on
September 21st.
Phases of the Moon
New Moon First Quarter Full Moon Last Quarter
Jan. 4
Jan. 11 Jan. 18 Jan. 25 Feb. 2
Feb. 9 Feb. 16 Feb. 24 Mar. 3
Mar. 10 Mar. 17 Mar. 25 Apr. 2
Apr. 8 Apr. 15 Apr. 23 May 1
May 8 May 15 May 23 May 30
June 6 June 14 June 22 June 28
10
July 5 July 13 July 21 July 28
Aug. 4 Aug. 12 Aug. 19 Aug. 26
Sept. 3 Sept. 11 Sept. 18 Sept 24.
Oct. 2 Oct. 10 Oct. 17 Oct. 24
Nov. 1 Nov. 09 Nov. 15 Nov. 23
Dec. 1 Dec. 08 Dec. 15 Dec. 22
Dec. 30
Supermoons
So-called ‘supermoons’ occur when the Full Moon happens to coincide with the Moon’s closest
approach to Earth (‘perigee’), and therefore appear larger than usual. In 2024 there will be three
such moons: on the 18th of September, 16th of October, and 15th of November. As well as a
supermoon, September 18th will host a partial lunar eclipse that will be visible in Guernsey!
Dwarf planets and asteroids
Pluto will reach opposition on the 23nd of July, at magnitude 15, around midnight low in the South. It
will appear star-like and requires a telescope to observe. The other three dwarf planets (Eris,
Makemake and Haumea) are too faint to be seen in most amateur telescopes, although Makemake
does reach opposition on the 30th March.
Ceres, the largest asteroid in the Asteroid Belt, will reach opposition on July 06st, at magnitude 7.3,
visible low in the South in the evening.
Eclipses
As usual a poor year for eclipses with only one partial lunar eclipse, being visible from Guernsey.
The partial lunar eclipse will be visible on the 18th September, peaking at 02:45am UTC.
There will be a total solar eclipse visible across much of North America on the 08 April. Watch out
for livestreams and photos of the event!
Occultations
There is a lunar occultation of Saturn on the 21st August, which should be visible from Guernsey in
the early morning. Saturn will disappear at 03:25 UTC and reappear at 04:22 UTC.
Lunar conjunctions
The best conjunctions of the Moon and the bright planets, with their positions and separations are:
14 Jan Saturn South in evening 2°08’
18 Jan Jupiter Southwest in evening 2°46’
06 Apr Mars South in morning 1°58’
03 May Saturn South in morning 0°50'
05 May Mars South in morning 0°11'
31 May Saturn Southwest in early morning 0°22’
24 July Saturn South in the morning 0°23’
21 August Saturn Southwest in the morning 0°27’
17 Sept Saturn South in evening 0°18’
20 Nov Mars South in morning 2°26'
04 Dec Venus South around lunchtime 2°15'
08 Dec Saturn South in evening 0°18'
18 Dec Mars West in evening 0°54'
11
Planetary conjunctions
The best observable planetary conjunctions, with their positions and separations, are given below.
A planetary conjunction is when two objects appear close together in the sky.
15 July Mars and Uranus South, morning 0°33'
14 Aug Mars and Jupiter South, early morning 0°18'
Meteors
The Perseids will peak on the night of 12/13 August, with some 140 per hour. The moon will set at
22:08, so observations after this will hopefully have dark skies. The richest annual shower, the
Geminids, will peak on the night of 13/14 December. The Moon however will be almost full, and so
will interfere with observations.
There are, of course, minor meteor showers during the year, and sporadics may be seen at any
time. For shower details see the 2023 BAA Handbook.
Comets
There are two bright-comets likely visible in 2024. The first, 2023-A3 (Tsuchinshan-ATLAS), is a
long period comet which reaches a perihelion of 0.3 au in September 2024. The predictions are
uncertain at the time of writing, but there is a possibility a tail will become visible in October.
The second is a returning comet, known as 12P/Pons-Brooks. It was discovered by Jean-Louis
Pons, a French astronomer famous for discovering the most comets (37!). It may be visible in
binoculars in late February, and possibly the naked eye by late March. It will disappear into the
Southern Hemisphere by late April.
Detailed comet predictions for 2024 are available on the website of the British Astronomical
Association’s Comet Section: https://people.ast.cam.ac.uk/~jds/preds24.pdf. Also check the
Heavens-Above website (heavens-above.com) for star charts showing comet positions, and use
programs such as StarryNight for detailed location charts.
The Sun
We are moving towards a solar maximum in 2025, where solar activity, including sunspots, should
be most active. There can be outbursts of activity, not only of sunspots but also of coronal holes and
coronal mass ejections, which can result in displays of the aurora borealis (and australis) at high
latitudes. Details of sunspot numbers are at www.ips.gov.au/Solar/1/6, and real-time views of the
Sun are at https://umbra.nascom.nasa.gov/newsite/images.html. Auroral alerts, with lots of other
information, are at www.spaceweather.com.
Equinoxes and solstices
The following are the dates and times of the equinoxes and solstices in 2024:
Vernal Equinox 20 March 03:04 UTC
Summer Solstice 20 June 20:49 UTC
Autumnal Equinox 22 September 12:42 UTC
Winter Solstice 21 December 09:20 UTC
12
Satellites
The International Space Station (ISS) is regularly visible from Guernsey, looking like a very bright
star crossing our skies from west to east. With the decommissioning of Iridium satellites flashes from
them are now quite rare. Many other, fainter, satellites appear every night. Details of the times and
directions of visibility (together with sky charts and much more) can be obtained from www.heavens-
above.com, linked from our webpage www.astronomy.org.gg/iss.htm.
Courses
From time to time the Astronomy Section offers public lectures, courses and events for children,
please follow our Eventbrite page to receive details.
https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/o/la-societe-guernesiaise-astronomy-section-31040695447
The Orion Nebula
The winter constellation of Orion the Hunter is the most striking constellation in the northern
hemisphere. Visible with the naked eye, the brightest region is the Orion Nebula in the sword
which lies approximately 1,300 light-years distance from Earth.
Fittingly, believed to be the cosmic fire of creation by the Maya of Mesoamerica, it is an
enormous cloud of gas and dust where vast numbers of new stars are being forged. The
brightest, central region is the home of four massive, young stars arranged in a trapezoidal
pattern (T), unleashing their ultraviolet light, carving a cavity within the nebula and disrupting
the growth of hundreds of smaller stars.
Recent James Webb Space Telescope near-infrared studies of the Trapezium Cluster by
Samuel G. Pearson and Mark J. McCaughrean have revealed free-floating pairs of planet-
like objects with masses between 0.6 and 13 times the mass of Jupiter, that are still quite
young – about 1 million years old and thus luminous and warm. They have been dubbed
Jupiter Mass Binary Objects, or JuMBOs. To date 40 pairs and two triple systems have been
found. Their origin is presently a mystery and new observations are currently scheduled for
early 2024 – this discovery could lead to a revised model for stellar and/or planetary
formation.
Inner Orion Nebula and Trapezium Cluster covering an area 4 x 2.75 light-years, made using
the NIRCam instrument on the James Webb Space Telescope. The centre cavity is mostly
filled with ionised gas, seen here in purple, while the surroundings have a mix of dust and
molecular gas seen in reds, browns, and greens. The bright area is being eroded by the
massive stars at the centre of the region and there are many pillars of gas and dust which
are being carved. Image credit: NASA/ESA/CSA.
The Extremely Large Telescope
In 2012 the ESO (European Southern Observatory) approved the programme for
construction of the ELT, short for the Extremely Large Telescope. With a primary mirror of a
diameter of 39 metres, this will be the largest telescope ever constructed to gather
observations in the visible and near-infrared wavelengths of light. Currently the first light for
the telescope and first set of scientific observations are planned to take place in 2028.
An image comparing a 3D Render of what the telescope will look like compared to other
large ground-based telescopes and the Colosseum in Rome. Image Credit: ESO
As a ground-based telescope, it is possible to construct a telescope larger than would be
possible for a space telescope such as The Hubble or James Webb Space Telescopes.
However, being located on Earth creates other challenges that space telescopes do not
have to contend with. In order to combat many of the challenges facing a ground-based
telescope, the ESO selected Cerro Armazones, a mountain at an altitude of about 3
kilometres, in Chile’s Atacama Desert. The height at which the telescope is situated will
minimise the amount of atmospheric turbulence that the telescope will have to contend with.
Additionally, the location that was chosen has low amounts of rainfall (over 320 clear nights
per year) and low average wind speeds allowing the telescope to collect as much data as
possible. Furthermore, due to the remote location, the ELT will have access to some of the
darkest skies on Earth.
Despite the ideal location of the telescope minimising the disadvantages of being a ground-
based telescope, the telescope will still experience amounts of atmospheric turbulence,
affecting the observations of the telescope. To further reduce the effect of atmospheric
turbulence on the telescope’s observations, the telescope itself will contain adaptive optics.
Having adaptive optics means that a telescope’s mirror will be able to make real time minute
adjustments for atmospheric turbulence, allowing the telescope to deform its mirrors in order
to compensate for the blurring effects caused by Earth’s atmosphere.
An image of the current progress of the construction taken in September 2023
Image Credit: ESO/G. Vecchia
Currently the construction of the telescope has passed the milestone of being 50% complete.
As of the 12th January 2024 the first 18 hexagonal mirror segments (out of 796) for the
telescope’s primary mirror have arrived at the ESO’s Paranal Observatory in Chile. After
arrival, the segments were examined to ensure that they did not suffer any damage during
the process of being transported from Europe.
Earth’s Gravity
Newton was not the first person to observe that apples fall to the ground but he was the first
to come up with a good explanation. He postulated that gravity was a force and it was the
same force that not only causes an apple to fall but also keeps the Moon in it’s orbit. His
triumph was to come up with mathematical equations and laws of motion to make those
ideas explicit. It is an experimental fact that, in the absence of air resistance, all objects fall
to Earth with an acceleration of 9.8 m/s2. Given the mass and radius of the Earth, along with
Newton’s gravitational constant, you can use Newton’s formulae to calculate that figure.
Newton’s idea of gravity as a force seemed to explain everything. It was therefore a great
surprise when, 200 years after Newton, Einstein came up with a radically different
explanation. His idea is neatly summed up by John Archibald Wheeler’s quote: “Spacetime
tells matter how to move, matter tells spacetime how to curve”. The idea is often illustrated
by a picture of a heavy ball, representing say a star or planet, which is placed on a rubber
sheet and makes the sheet sink in the middle. (You have to assume you are in in a
gravitational field for the model to work). Then when you roll a small object across the sheet
it’s path does not follow a straight line but deviates because of the sheet’s curvature. In this
article I’d like to explore this model in the context of the gravity we experience here on Earth.
The first thing we have to do is shrink down the Earth to more or less a point while keeping
the mass (about 6 x 1024 kilograms) the same. In fact this is just what one does to calculate
the Newtonian gravitational force, though Newton did go to some trouble to show that the
gravitational effect of a spherically symmetric body was the same as if it’s entire mass was
concentrated at it’s centre. From that picture Newton could calculate the force of gravity on
an object. What is required is the way it looks from Einstein’s point of view. That was provided
by Karl Schwarzschild.
Karl Schwarzschild was a contemporary of Einstein and within a short time of Einstein
publishing his theory of general relativity in 1915 Schwarzschild came up with an equation
describing the curvature of space and time around a point mass. Remarkably he came up
with his equation while serving on the front in the First World War. Using his equation one
can calculate the motion of freely-falling objects in the vicinity of what we would now call a
non-rotating black hole. Unlike in Newton’s version Schwarzschild’s equations showed the
existence of an event horizon from within which nothing can escape and other curious things
happen. If we did shrink the Earth down to a point mass it’s event horizon radius would be a
tiny 0.9 cm.
We can use Schwarzschild’s equation to explore the curvature of space for our rubber sheet
model. The radius of the Earth is some 6,400 km, many orders of magnitude larger than the
event horizon. In fact, as we shall see, we are well away from any significant distortion, out
in the region where our rubber sheet is almost flat. Not entirely flat however. A freely-falling
particle follows a path called a geodesic and if we apply Einstein’s geodesic equations to the
slightly curved space-time of Schwarzschild’s equation we get that an object will accelerate
at a rate of 9.8 m/s2, just as observed and calculated using Newton’s methodology.
So far so good. The rubber sheet model suggests that space is distorted, but by how much?
If we plug the numbers for the mass and radius of the Earth into Schwarzschild’s equation
we find that if you take a vertical distance of 1 km at 10 km above the Earth’s surface and
then bring it vertically down to the ground the length will increase by about 1 nanometre.
That’s an imperceptible increase. If the stretch factor was very much larger we might have
to start taking into account the difference between our horizontal inches and our vertical
inches. We can ignore that and for all intents and purposes our local space is flat.
Space however is not the the only thing that is distorted by the Earth’s mass. Time is
distorted too, by a factor of about 9 nanoseconds per day per kilometre of height. Clocks run
a little bit slower as you descend and a little bit faster as you go up. The difference in daily
life is imperceptible. If it was greater then you might find after spending some time at altitude
on a plane journey that when you come down to the ground you’d need to adjust your watch
back to Earth Surface Time as well as to the local time zone.
The difference may be small but the altitude effect has in fact been measured by highly
accurate atomic clocks taken on plane journeys. GPS satellites are at a much higher altitude
and there the difference in clock rates is definitely important. A clock on a GPS satellite
would gain some 45 microseconds a day due to gravitational effects. A different relativistic
effect causes the clock to run slower but the two don’t cancel out so a net adjustment has to
be made to synchronise with clocks on the ground.
So we have two gravitational distortions, space and time. Which is the most important? For
Newton time and space were separate and independent. In Einstein’s theory they are
combined into a single entity, space-time. To use them together requires a conversion factor
between space and time, which is 299,792 km for 1 second (the speed of light). A very small
amount of time is equivalent to very large distance. Our time distortion of 9 nanoseconds per
day per km is equivalent to about 27 cm. In the geodesic equations it is the time factor that
is overwhelmingly important for the gravity we experience here on Earth. Things fall because
time runs slower lower down.
Where does that leave our rubber sheet model? As an illustration of the way space stretches
as you approach a massive object it does its job. As an explanation of gravity, because it
ignores the curvature of time, it is completely misleading.
Peter M Langford, November 2023 ©2023 PM Langford
Further reading: “Exploring Black Holes, Introduction to General Relativity” by Edwin F
Taylor and John Archibald Wheeler, Addison Wesley Press, 2000
19
First Light from the Vera C. Rubin Observatory
Generally, when people think of telescopes, Hubble or James Webb comes to mind, both of
which are space telescopes. However, there are approximately 50 ground-based telescopes
in world-wide operation with several more currently under construction. Each new telescope
is more sensitive, delving deeper into the cosmos, seeking to answer many fundamental
questions such as how the Universe began and what is the nature of dark matter and dark
energy.
One new observatory due to see
first light this year is the Vera C.
Rubin Observatory, which
houses a uniquely designed
reflecting telescope. What makes
this telescope special is its optical
configuration which features a
unique three-mirror design,
giving it a wide-field of view of
3.5˚ (7 x 7 full moons), covering
a 64 cm diameter flat focal plane,
while maintaining a compact
shape that allows it to move
quickly across the sky. The
primary mirror is 8.4 metres
diameter with a 4.42 metre
convex secondary mirror – the
largest ever made and a 5 metre
tertiary mirror. It is optically very
fast at F/1.2 and is fitted with a 3.2
gigapixel camera which is cooled
to -100˚ C and an automated data
processing system.
The Rubin Observatory’s mission
is to continue with the long
tradition of sky surveys. These
started as visually compiled
catalogues such as Tycho
Brahe’s Thousand Star
Catalogue, Johannes Bayer’s
Uranometria and even the well-
loved Messier list of objects
produced by Charles Messier.
With the advent of photography
everything changed as surveys were then recorded on photographic plates, starting with
Vera C. Rubin Telescope Observatory under
construction on Cerro Pachón, in Chile. Image credit:
Rubin Obs/NSF/AURA.
Schematic showing the dome and Simonyi Survey
Telescope. Image credit: Rubin Obs/NSF/AURA.
20
Carte du Ceil (lit. Map of the Sky) which was a vast and unprecedented international star-
mapping project initiated in 1887 by the Paris Observatory, that contains 22,000 glass plates
collected over nearly six decades. An even larger collection of some 500,000 photographic
plates is the Harvard Plate Collection. Early photographic surveys provide an invaluable
base-line comparison for modern astrometric surveys.
The Legacy of Space and Time (LSST) collaboration will survey the entire available southern
sky every few days, taking 15-second exposures every 20 seconds, for the next ten years.
To repoint any telescope within 5 seconds is quite a task, to repoint a 60 tonne telescope
with an 8.4 metre primary mirror is an exceptional achievement. The camera is a mosaic of
189 CCD sensors with 16 megapixels each and a 0.2 arc-second sampling resolution. The
camera is expected to take over 200,000 images per year; this is a staggering 1.28 petabytes
of uncompressed data - a petabyte of computer data is 8 x 1015 bits of information.
The sheer volume of data is far more than humans can review, so an automated processing
system has been designed which issues alerts on three different timescales: prompt, daily
and annually. The prompt produces alerts, issued within 60 seconds about objects that have
changed brightness or position when compared to archive data. This allows near-real time
identification of changes, such as supernovae, asteroids and comets. It is estimated that as
many as 10 million alerts might be generated per night, which will be further sub-sampled
and finally, forwarded on to interested parties.
Camera focal plane comprising 3 x 3 CCD “rafts”. Image credit: LSST Collaboration.
21
The name of the observatory is very fitting. Vera Florence Cooper Rubin (1928-2016) was
an American astronomer whose work provided convincing evidence for the existence of
unseen "dark" matter in the Universe. Prior to her work, dark matter was a concept that had
been introduced but not taken seriously. But when Vera Rubin and her colleague Kent Ford
studied more than 60 galaxies and found that the stars at the outer edges were moving just
as fast as those towards the centre, they knew for sure that something strange was going
on. What they observed didn't obey the laws of physics - if they added up the mass of all of
the seen matter, the galaxies should have been flying apart! There had to be some invisible
mass holding the galaxies together and causing them to rotate at such high velocities. The
work resulting from these observations eventually convinced the science community that
dark matter was real. Since then, scientists have calculated that dark matter makes up more
than 80% of all the matter in the Universe, while regular matter makes up less than 20%.
Learning more about this mysterious unseen matter is one of the main science goals of the
LSST collaboration.
Another primary aim will be to unlock the fossil record of galaxy cluster evolution by looking
for the exceptionally faint glow of intracluster light. This is the collective glow of innumerable
stars stripped from their home galaxies and left to wander the vast intergalactic space. This
will be the first astronomical survey to provide scientists with the data they need to detect
intracluster light in thousands of galaxy clusters, unlocking clues to the evolutionary history
of the Universe on large scales.
Dr Vera C. Rubin operating the 2.1 metre telescope and spectrograph at Kitt Peak national
Observatory. Image credit: NSF's Optical-Infrared Astronomy Research Laboratory/
KPNO/AURA.
22
Twenty twenty-four could be as exciting as 2022 when the JWST saw first light.
Jean Dean
Image of the Abell 85 galaxy cluster, taken by the Hyper Suprime-Cam on the Subaru
telescope in Hawaii. The enhanced teal hazy overlay is intracluster light — the collective
glow of innumerable stars stripped from their home galaxies and left to wander the vast
intergalactic space. Image credit: Astronomical Data/Image: M. Montes (Instituto de
Astrofísica de Canarias); Artistic Enhancement: J. Pinto (Rubin Observatory).
23
2023 in Spaceflight
Thanks in part to the efforts of Elon Musk’s SpaceX, commercial spaceflight is in an ongoing
boom at the moment. 2023 saw 211 successful rocket launches, the third year running the
record has been broken. 98 of these launches, almost half, were by SpaceX. The majority
of SpaceX launches this year were carrying Starlink satellites designed to provide global
internet coverage. There are now over 5000 Starlink satellites in orbit, which along with other
proposed mega-constellations provide an ongoing challenge for ground-based astronomy.
2023 saw several notable launches for astrophysics and planetary exploration.
On the astrophysics side, the European Space Agency launched Euclid, a space telescope
designed to probe cosmology and the mysteries of dark matter and dark energy. Euclid will
study the large-scale structure of the Universe and photograph more than one third of the
Night Sky, covering thousands of times more area than Hubble or JWST ever will. Japan
successfully launched XRISM, a next-generation x-ray telescope which will study distant
black holes and energetic galaxy outflows.
One of the first images taken by Euclid showing the Perseus cluster, revealing
faint galaxies which have never been observed before.
ESA/Euclid/Euclid Consortium/NASA, image processing by J.-C. Cuillandre
(CEA Paris-Saclay), G. Anselmi, CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO
24
Looking a bit closer to home, 2023 also saw the conclusion of some long-running missions
to study our solar system, as well as the launch of exciting new probes we will be hearing
about for years to come. OSIRIS-Rex successfully returned samples from the asteroid
Bennu and collected much more material than scientists were hoping for. These samples
will tell us about the formation of our Solar System, as Bennu has been preserved as a
‘time capsule’ for a few billion years. The presence of any organic molecules may also tell
us about how life evolved on Earth. OSIRIS-Rex continues its mission and is expected to
arrive at the asteroid Apophis in 2029. NASA also launched the Psyche mission, to explore
the asteroid 16 Psyche, one of the largest in the asteroid belt. 16 Psyche is particularly
interesting to scientists because it has an extremely high metal content and is thought to
be part of the ejected core of a protoplanet which is leftover from the formation of the solar
system.
The Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer (JUICE) mission also began its 8-year journey to the gas
giant Jupiter, where it will study Jupiter’s largest moons, particularly Ganymede, for evidence
of subsurface oceans. JUICE will also probe Europa for organic molecules, and for the first-
time attempt to measure the thickness of the surface ice above the volcanic regions.
A closeup of the sample returned from Osiris-Rex, which NASA has finally managed to
open 4 months after it landed in the Australian Outback. They even had to design and build
a special tool to undo the bolts! NASA/Erika Blumenfeld/Joseph Aebersold
25
Our own Moon hasn’t missed out on the fun either, although she is a fickle mistress. There
have been several missions, both private and public, in 2023 and the majority have
encountered various technical issues. Luna 25, the first Russian lunar mission since Luna
24 in 1974, suffered an engine issue which resulted in the spacecraft crashing into the
surface. The third Indian lunar mission, Chandrayaan-3, which consists of an orbiter, lander
and rover successfully landed on the lunar surface, making India only the fourth country to
successfully land on the Moon. The Vikram lander touched down near the South Pole, which
is of particular interest as there are permanently shadowed craters that may contain water
ice. The Japanese also launched a lunar lander, named SLIM, which took a slow route to
the Moon over a number of months and successfully landed in early 2024, making Japan
the 5th country to land on the Moon. It appears however that SLIM fell over on landing,
blocking light to the solar panels and only lasted a few hours on the surface before the
batteries drained. Astrobotic’s private lander, named Peregrine, suffered a rupture fuel tank
that caused the spacecraft to spin out of control on the way to the Moon. The loss of fuel
prevented a landing attempt and the lander burned up in the Earth’s atmosphere upon it’s
return. All is not lost however, as in 2024 there are several more private missions aiming to
land on the lunar surface, as well as the NASA VIPER rover which will explore those exciting
shadowed craters at the lunar south pole.
Other noteworthy accomplishments which I don’t have the space to dive into include the
launch and fiery explosion (or Rapid Unscheduled Disassembly!) of SpaceX’s latest Starship
rocket prototype, a number of private missions by Axiom Space carrying tourists to the ISS,
the launch of Virgin Galactic’s first paying customers on VSS Unity, and the heaviest
communications satellite ever launched to a geostationary orbit.
A crescent Earth taken from the Peregrine lunar lander on its ill-fated mission to the Moon.
Credit Astrobotic.
26
Lastly, an honourable mention for Ingenuity, The Little Helicopter That Could. Initially
expected to make only a handful of flights across a few days of life, Ginny, has massively
surpassed all expectations by surviving for over 2.5 years and making 72 flights (as of
publication). Ginny is the first aircraft ever flown on another planet and operates mostly
autonomously due to the speed-of-light delay between Earth and Mars. As a technology
demonstrator, Ginny has paved the way for future aerial exploration of extra-terrestrial
worlds, and the promise of future missions that will be able to cover more distance, much
faster over inhospitable terrain that would be challenging for a rover like Curiosity or
Perseverance.
2024 also promises to be an exciting year for spaceflight. Highlights include the launch of
the Europa Clipper mission, which will perform a detailed study of the Jovian moon and its
subsurface ocean. The new spaceplane Dream Chaser is also scheduled to launch to the
ISS, and we have already seen the launch of the new methane powered Vulcan rocket. In
April, another private spaceflight from Axiom may perform the first commercial spaceflight in
history. At the end of the year, Rocket Lab is planning to fling a small satellite towards Venus,
the first private mission, to study its atmosphere. Maybe the disputed claims of an organic
molecule called phosphine, which could indicate microbial life, will be settled for good?
In summary, 2023 has been an incredible year for spaceflight, and 2024 promises to be
better yet. In the longer term, both NASA and the Chinese Manned Space Agency (CMSA)
are still aiming for boots on the Moon before 2030, and the new Space Race appears to be
heating up.
Tom Harvey
(Editor’s Note – if you want to track what’s going on in Astronomy this year, the New York
Times offers a free calendar at https://www.nytimes.com/explain/2024/astronomy-space-
calendar , which you can add to your Google, Apple or Outlook calendar app.)